---
title: Volume 1 — The Process of Production of Capital
layout: page
---

## Part One: Commodities and Money ##

### Chapter 1: The Commodity&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-01-commentary) ###

> The wealth of societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails
> appears as an 'immense collection of commodities'; the individual commodity
> appears as its elementary form. Our investigation therefore begins with the
> analysis of the commodity. (124)

#### The Two Factors of the Commodity: Use-Value and Value&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-01.01-detailed-commentary) ####

A commodity is a thing that is *produced for exchange*. It is use-value and value.

It is *use-value* because it has the physical properties to satisfy human
needs. As a use-value it is particular and not commensurable.

It is *value* because it is exchangeable against any other commodity – different
commodities are equated, not in only theory but in practice.  The expression of
this general quality to be exchangeable expresses itself by exchange against a
particular other commodity. This expression of value is *exchange value*.

A commodity is value because it human labour is needed to produce it – which is
used as lever to gain access other products of labour.

#### The Dual Character of the Labour Embodied in Commodities ####

What counts is not that labour produced a particular useful thing – *concrete
labour* – but that labour is effort. Labour is reduced to *abstract labour*. The
*substance of value* is abstract human labour.

Labour is measured in time and so value is measured in labour time. But any
commodity counts only as a representative of all commodities of a certain kind
due to generalised exchange. The magnitude of value is not individual labour
time, but *socially necessary labour time*.

For this to have full effect, it is presupposed that producers switch branches
of industry when this allows them to get more value for their products. Some
branches of industry are not that easy to switch into, they are hence to some
extend exempt from the law of value: in these branches of industry *complicated
labour* is performed. The labour there counts as multiplied labour of other
branches of industry.

*Productivity of labour* measure how many use-values per time are produced; it
is a determination of concrete labour. Increasing productivity on a social
level has no effect on the amount of value produced in, say, one hour. Instead,
the same value is distributed over more products. However, since *socially
necessary labour time* determines value, anyone producing faster than average
stands to gain: she can demand the equivalent of, say, 1 hour worth of abstract
labour for, say, $\frac{1}{2}$ abstract labour-time actually expended. On the
one hand, more labour means more value. On the other hand, less labour relative
to other producers means more value per labour.

#### The Value-Form, or Exchange-Value ####

Commodities must express their claim to be value – not only themselves but a bit
of social wealth. They must express this in a way which is unified, so that they
all make the same claim. The express this by declaring one commodity to be value
pure and simple and by declaring themselves to be equal to that commodity:
*money*. This also means that they deny their own immediate value being and they
have to proof that they are indeed money, the must become money.

#### The Fetishism of the Commodity and Its Secret ####

While people collectively bring about the social relations of commodity
production and exchange, they are not aware of this, they do not do this
consciously insofar they are only interested in their practical success in this
economy. Rather, the social relations of their labours appear to them as
relations of things and they relate to these objective forms.  In this society
the social relations of labour of producers is expressed as *relations between
their products*. In the price of commodities producers see how much social wealth
their own labour commands. The latter fact does not appear directly, but
indirectly in the relation between commodities. This does not follow from the
division of labour but from the particular mode of production: private
production for exchange.

### Chapter 2: The Process of Exchange&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-02-commentary) ###

Marx picks up on the commodity owners and their intends only now to determine
them as character masks of their commodities. The process of exchange
presupposes that the exchanges recognise each other as free and equal *persons* –
a status guaranteed by the state. Their power over each other is only the power
of their commodities.

### Chapter 3: Money, or the Circulation of Commodities ###

#### The Measure of Values ####

In the price form a commodity claims to be money equal. To allow for this is the
first function of the money commodity: to stand in ideally so that commodities
can express their value – they are not only some particular concrete material
wealth but also a part of and claim to total social wealth. The money commodity
acts as *measure of value* because it is value. It is acts as the *standard of
prices* because it as a use-value can be measured and subdivided (length,
volume, weight). No real money has to be available for a commodity to express
its value in a price. The price form is a claim of a commodity to be money
equal; it has to prove it and become money: “Hard cash lurks within the ideal
measure of value” (198)

#### The Means of Circulation ####

To be consumed a commodity must first be sold. Firstly, the body of a commodity
is only useful in the hands of someone else (production for exchange). Secondly,
the producer can only consume it, after it has been exchanged for money and back
into a commodity. For a commodity to be sold it must not only meet demand but
effective demand. A commodity must perform the change of form
Commodity-Money-Commodity (*$C-M-C$*). The metamorphosis of a commodity splits into
two parts which are separate but belong together: *selling* and *buying*. Selling
and buying must go together but often do not. Here, selling is the salto
mortale, the point when a commodity proves that it is value. A commodity drops
out of circulation when it is consumed. Money, on the other hand, does not drop
out: circulation of money. In this circulation money is always only a fleeing
moment, the point is not to hold on to, but to pass it on to complete the
metamorphosis with M-C. In this function money can hence be replaced by a *symbol
of value*: a coin.

#### Money ####

So far all money functions did not require actual money to be involved.  With
money as money it is not sufficient any more to be only ideally present (measure
of value) or to be represented by a symbol (means of circulation). Actual *money*
is required.

The first act of circulation – C-M – is the hard part, money is the ultimate
means to gain access to anything in society, everything else is such only
provisionally, in a society where producers deny each other the means to satisfy
their needs. Hence, the desire and need arises for money. The *hoarder* pursues
this interest by not engaging in consumption, she becomes richer by denying
herself consumption – she does not really get richer.

The present absence of money ought not to hinder business. Commodity owners may
replace actual payment of money with promises of payment (which again may
circulate). The money used to pay out such a promise of payment is a *means of
payment*: it does not circulate commodities but satisfy a demand for payment. In
the end only very little actual money may change hands because opposing demands
cancel each other out.  However, when the process does not run smoothly, hard
cash is demanded.

On the world market where money represents truly abstract wealth and where money
is *world money* actual gold is required to settle accounts.  No coin or promise
suffices.

## Part Two: The Transformation of Money into Capital&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-03-04-transition) ##

### Chapter 4: The General Formula for Capital ###

The form of simple commodity circulation is $C-M-C$. The form of *capital* is
Money-Commodity-Money ($M-C-M$): value is the expressed purpose. This form would
be a mere tautology if M at the beginning was the same as at the end. The only
sensible movement is *$M-C-M'$* money becoming more money, value generating
surplus-value. Still, the beginning and the end is the same: money. This was not
the case with $C-M-C$ where the first and last commodity were different. In itself
$M-C-M'$ has no limit. The bearer of the movement $M-C-M'$ is a capitalist and
$M-C-M'$ the general formula of capital.

### Chapter 5: Contradictions in the General Formula ###

$M-C-M'$ seems to fly in the face of the laws of commodity exchange where equal
exchanges for equal. $M' = M + m$ cannot come from circulation. At the same time,
$M' = M + m$ cannot come about separated from circulation.  A commodity producer
can produce value on her own, but she cannot produce surplus-value m. That is,
if M is ought to be reason for M' then this reason cannot be separated from
circulation. “Capital cannot therefore arise from circulation, and it is equally
impossible for it to arise apart from circulation. It must have its, origin both
in circulation and not in circulation.” (268)

### Chapter 6: The Sale and Purchase of Labour-Power ###

The apparent contradiction is resolved by the purchase of a special commodity:
*labour-power*. Labour-power, the ability to work, can be bought on the
market. The value of this commodity is determined by the amount of
socially-necessary labour to reproduce it, like for other commodities. Once it
is bought it can made to produce more value than is needed to reproduce it. The
use-value of labour-power is that it can create value. The riddle of
surplus-value is solved. A money owner must find *free workers* on the
market. Free in a double sense: free to sell their labour-power and free from
the means of production which compels them to sell their labour-power.

Capital is hence confronted with the determinations of the labour process.

## Part Three: The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value ##

### Chapter 7: The Labour Process and the Valorization Process&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-07-commentary) ###

Labour is the purposeful interaction with nature. The *labour process* uses
tools and material, application of the laws of nature (physics etc.) to
accomplish purpose. Tools and material are consumed in the production
process. These the the conditions dictated to capital and cannot change. Under
the rule of capital two modifications: command of the capitalist and separation
of the product of labour from the immediate producer. Under the rule of capital
labour is a moment of capital in production.

The labour process only exists under the rule of capital if it is also
*valorisation process*. Production must result in commodities which contain more
value than was expended on production. The value of those commodities is a
combination of the value of the means of production used up during their
production and the new value created by labour during production.

Capital hence structures and coordinate the production process such that its
purpose realises itself.

### Chapter 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-08-commentary) ###

The moments of the labour process appear differently in the valorisation
process.

The means of production (tools and material) are *constant capital*. They do not
create new value, are not variable but constant magnitudes as their value is
simply transferred. How? The concrete side of labour transforms material into a
finished product and hence transfers its value. It is a gratis service of labour
that it transfers and therewith preserves value.

Labour-power once it is bought by a capitalist is *variable capital*. The amount
of value it produces is variable and not dependent on its value itself. Its
value is not transferred but reproduced. Furthermore, it is the part of capital
that produces surplus-value.

### Chapter 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value ###

The movement $M-C-M'$ depends on the expansion that v can accomplish. The
*rate of surplus value* is the rate of exploitation of labour-power. It is given
by surplus-value/variable-capital = $\frac{s}{v}$. Constant capital $c$ does
not influence the amount of surplus value $s$, except to provide the necessary
conditions. Improving the ratio $\frac{s}{v}$ is not the standpoint of
capitalists, but it expresses the reason of surplus-value and its effectiveness.

The time during which the worker only produces an equivalent of the value of her
labour-power is called *necessary labour-time*. The time during which she
produces surplus-value is called *surplus labour-time*. The rate of exploitation
is hence also equally expressed as (surplus labour-time)/(necessary
labour-time). The sum of necessary labour-time and surplus labour-time is
absolute extend of labour-time, i.e. the *working day*.

### Chapter 10: The Working Day ###

The rate of surplus-value is expressed by the ratio of surplus labour-time to
necessary labour-time. For a given necessary labour-time capital can hence
improve the ratio by extending the *working day*. The working day is not a fixed
quantity, only necessary labour-time is - for now - fixed. The working day is
bounded above by a *physical limit* when workers cannot be sufficiently
reproduced to do their job and by class struggle (*"moral
obstacles"*). Capitalists demand to maximise the utilisation of the commodity they
purchased, workers demand that they can use their commodity - labour-power - as
a means of living. From the laws of commodity exchange no extend of the working
day follows.

> Between equal rights, force decides (344)

Through class struggle the state is informed that capital's hunger for surplus
labour is destroying the basis of its own valorisation. The state intervenes and
establishes a normal working day - a normal standard of exploitation. This
restriction on exploitation in the interest of its continued existence must be
enforced against capital. The state also reflects that this restriction is for
capital by allowing exceptions.

Capital not only has an interest in extending the working day per worker but
also in keeping production going all night and day. The preservation and
utilisation of constant capital is here the main incentive: the *shift system*.

### Chapter 11: The Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value ###

1. The *mass of surplus-value* $S$ is given by $S = \frac{s}{v} \cdot V$
   where $s$ is the surplus-value supplied by a single worker per day, $v$
   is the value of her labour-power and $V$ is the total expenditure on
   variable capital. Hence, as $m=\frac{s}{v}$ and $V$ determine the mass of
   surplus value, a drop in one can be compensated by an increase in the
   other. However:
2. The absolute length of the day - i.e. that it only has 24 hours - puts a
   limit on compensating a reduction of variable capital by an increased rate of
   surplus-value.
3. the mass of surplus-value produced by different capitals - if the value of
   labour-power is given and the rate of exploitation constant - differs
   directly as their outlay in variable capital $V$.

This means that the amount of workers employed (resp. in society) constitutes a
limit for $S$ for a given capital (resp. overall).

## Part Four: The Production of Relative Surplus-Value ##

### Chapter 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value ###

Improving the rate of surplus-value by lengthening the working day is the
production of *absolute surplus-value*. The production of absolute surplus-value
has its limits in the length of the day and the amount of workers employed or in
society.

The length of the working day constant the rate of surplus-value can only be
improved by shortening necessary labour-time while maintaining the length of the
working day. This is the production of *relative surplus-value*.

Necessary labour-time is shortened by improving the productivity of labour in
those branches of industry for those products which (eventually) end up as
necessary means of subsistence for workers. If the necessary means of
subsistence can be produced more cheaply, necessary labour-time drops. Capital
uses its command over the labour process to restructure it according to its
needs.

This result is attained not by a conscious plan by capitalists to reduce
necessary labour-time but by their attempts to increase the *productivity of
labour* in general. Since socially necessary labour-time determines value,
anyone producing faster than average stands to gain extra. For them individually
the ration $s/v$ is already improved. This is an incentive for capitalists to
increase productivity. Eventually competitors will catch up or perish. In any
case, the result is that the new level of productivity becomes generalised and
the value of the produced products drops. If these products belong to the
necessary means of subsistence, then this reduces the value of labour-power.

The purpose of reducing the required time to produce a given item is not to save
labour-time, but to save necessary labour-time in order to increase surplus
labour-time. Hence, labour saving technologies do not reduce in a reduction of
work.

### Chapter 13: Co-operation ###

It is a condition for capital that it employs several workers at the same
time. This allows for the first method of relative surplus-value production. It
emancipates itself from the limitations of individual workers and - if a certain
size is reached - their difference average out.

Additionally, employing many workers allows for a more economic use of constant
capital $c$ which might also reduce the value of labour-power if we are
considering branches of industries whose products somehow enter the means of
subsistence for workers. Economy of constant capital is picked up again
Volume 3.

Capital can also exploit gains in productivity which result from social labour
and *cooperation* (more people work, they teach each other).

The benefits of entail a certain size of capital which is bigger
than the formal minimal capital based on mere absolute surplus-value
production. A certain number of workers is needed and these workers need means
of production.

The workers who cooperate are not subject of their cooperation. It is only
capital which brings them together and impose cooperation on them. Capital must
hence supervise this cooperation and assert it against individual workers. This
requires a new strata of workers which exercise this control and supervision.

Cooperation is the logically and historically first method of production of
relative surplus-value.

### Chapter 14: The Division of Labour and Manufacture&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-14-commentary) ###

#### The Dual Origin of Manufacture ####

Capital transcends its dependency on the quality of independent parallel
labour-powers by restructuring their activity in accordance with their function
for, they become proper partial operations. This happens by either

1. splitting up production processes into their steps or 
2. becoming independent of previous partial operations.

However, capital remains dependent on the skill of its labourers in
*manufacture*. Workers become one-sided which increases their productivity but
makes them more dependent on capital.

#### The Specialized Worker and His Tools ####

This specialisation allow capital to reshape labour processes and tools.

1. Specialisation improves performance but at the same time is monotonous for
   the worker. Productivity increases to the detriment of workers.

2. Tools are specialised in accordance with their new narrower
   task. Productivity increases through monotonous specialisation becomes a
   quality of the tools.

#### The Two Fundamental Forms of Manufacture - Heterogeneous and Organic ####

1. heterogeneous manufacture: independent partial products and combination in
   the end (e.g., a watch)
2. organic manufacture: production phases become independent moments that happen
   in parallel by specialised workers.

#### The Division of Labour in Manufacture, and the Division of Labour in Society ####

The various degrees of skill required produce a hierarchy of jobs. At the same
time a category of unskilled labour is produced, which allows to reduce $v$.

In any case: less training costs and qualification required by simplification
and narrowing of labour.

#### The Capitalist Character of Manufacture ####

Manufacture increases - yet again - the minimal size required for capital as the
its methods require a certain size to be applied.

In the first step the worker had to sell her labour-power because she lacked the
means of production. Now, she has to sell her labour-power because her labour is
so narrowed and emptied that it could not be usefully expended except as part of
social production process which - in this society - capital puts together.

Yet, in manufacture capital remains dependent on the skill of its
workers. However, manufacture creates the technical basis for large scale
machinery which overcomes this obstacle.

### Chapter 15: Machinery and Large-Scale Industry ###

#### The Development of Machinery ####

With the use of *big machinery* capital emancipates itself from the limits of
individual skill and the human body. Tools are revolutionised and turn into a
modern system of machinery where human "hands" only help. The conditions and
form of labour is dictated to the work by the objective existence in the
machinery. The tool dictates the worker how to work.

The machine replaces the worker who operates single tools, replacement of human
strength by forces of nature.

The purpose of this operation is not a more pleasant production process or more
free time due to increases in productivity. The purpose is to reduce necessary
labour-time in order to increase surplus labour-time.

#### The Value Transferred by the Machinery to the Product ####

The results of science cost nothing once they are attained. But to use them the
appropriate means of production are required. Their value increases the value of
the product because their value is transferred. But the purpose is to make these
products cheaper. The individual machine might cost more, but because it is more
productive its value spreads across more products. Hence, there is less $c$
contribution for each individual product.

Furthermore, as the productivity of building machines increases, their value
drops, the become cheaper.

The final products part of value which is transferred from the means of
production increases relatively to $v$ but drops absolutely (the product becomes
cheaper).

Machinery is only employed to replace living necessary labour. It is only
worthwhile to capital to when it is cheaper to buy the machine than to pay
workers. The conditions for applying labour saving techniques are narrower than
in a rational mode of production. A machine is not used if it saves labour
absolutely, but only when it saves $v$.

#### The Most Immediate Effects of Machine Production on the Worker ####

1. Previous requirements on workers become obsolete which opens the door to hire
   new groups of workers previously not available to capital (women,
   children). This leads to more competition on the labour market and for each
   family more members must now work in order to survive. Previously, one wage
   had to suffice for family, now 2+ wages are required to do the same.

2. Big machinery creates new motives for the extension of the working day. A
   machine decays when it is used and when it is not used → incentive to use it
   all the time. As the productivity of labour used to produce the machine
   increases, it looses value (*moral depreciation*). As productivity gains
   generalise, a capitalist individual advantage in applying a certain machine
   diminishes and the rate of surplus-value drops. Capital counters this by
   extending the working day (in anticipation and in reaction). Also incentive
   to use up a machine as quickly as possible (day and night shifts)

3. Capitalist application of machines produces surplus population who are made
   redundant due to improved productivity of labour. Their weight weights down
   $v$.

4. Capital responds to the legal limit on the working day with mandating more
   *intense labour*, more labour in the same time. Since capital controls the
   production process in the form of its objective conditions it can now accomplish
   this.

The machine becomes the means to get more labour out of workers.

#### The Factory ####

The *factory* replaces the fixation of one special operation (manufacture) with
universal applicability, interchangeability. Skill is extinguished, the machine
applies the worker who only needs to be able to take that. Complete separation
of knowledge about the production process (*intellectual labour*) and the
immediate producers (*manual labour*).

This also creates a small strata of specialised workers who supervise workers
and machines.

#### The Struggle between Worker and Machine ####

The effect of capitalist application of machinery is detrimental to workers. The
machine makes workers redundant, which is not a reason to rejoice but means
poverty for those workers. The machine appears as the opponent of the worker.

#### The Compensation Theory, with Regard to the Workers Displaced by Machinery ####

The system of machinery separates workers from their means of subsistence. In
this ideology this appears as that these means of subsistence are now available
for other workers. Except that they do not have the means to pay for them. If
additional workers are employed, then by additional capital.

#### Repulsion and Attraction of Workers through the Development of Machine Production. Crises in the Cotton Industry ####

Rationalisation repulses workers - they are replaced by machines. If this leads
to an expansion of capitalist production then additional workers are attracted.
Relative diminution of workers, with (potential) absolute increase at the same
time.

#### The Revolutionary Impact of Large-Scale Industry on Manufacture, Handicrafts and Domestic Industry ####

To compete against superior productivity of large-scale industry manufacture,
handicraft and domestic industries extend and intensify the working day of their
workers. Only when this reaches a limit, those methods of production are
abandoned. When cheaper workers become available then these outdated methods of
production might become worthwhile again and sweatshops are set up.

#### The Health and Education Causes of the Factory Acts. ####

Even basic rules about hygiene and health have to be enforced against the agents
of production. This says everything necessary about this mode of production.

#### Large-Scale Industry and Agriculture ####

Large scale machinery revolutionises agriculture, no more farmers but rural wage
labourers. 

> Capitalist production, therefore, only develops the techniques and the degree
> of combination of the social process of production by simultaneously
> undermining the original sources of all wealth - the soil and the worker. (638)

## Part Five: The Production of Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value ##

### Chapter 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value ###

In Chapter 7 the concept of *productive labour was initially defined as
purposeful interaction with nature. Under the capitalist mode of production this
concept changes. It becomes wider because functions which were previously
functions of the same labourer now become distributed across labourer. To be
productive it now suffices to be an organ for the collective labourer. For
example, a worker exclusively coordinating the production process is a
productive labourer.

At the same time, the concept becomes narrower. Not only must the producer
produce value (first narrowing) but also surplus-value. Only that labour which
produces surplus-value is productive for capital. Which labour is productive is
determined by the purpose of capital.

The first method of production of surplus-value is the production of absolute
surplus-value: the extension of the working day. Here, capital does not
restructure the labour process: *formal subsumption*. It implements a time
relation in production which is divided into necessary and surplus labour.

This is the starting point and premise of the production of relative
surplus-value production where capital uses its command over the labour process
to restructure it according to its needs: *real subsumption*. The previously
established time relation is improved toward surplus labour-time.

### Chapter 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value ###

Assuming that commodities are sold at value and that labour-power never sells
below its value, we have three determinants for the relative magnitudes of
surplus-value and price of labour-power.

1. the length of the working day,
2. the normal intensity of labour, and
3. the productivity of labour.

These are hence levers for capital to diminish the value of labour power
relatively to surplus-value. The combination of these levers allows capital to
deal with the limits of all these levers on their own.

### Chapter 18: Different Formulae for the Rate of Surplus-Value ###

The correct formula for the rate of surplus-value is

$(I) \frac{\mbox{surplus-value}}{\mbox{variable capital}} = \frac{\mbox{surplus-value}}{\mbox{value of labour-power}} = \frac{\mbox{surplus labour}}{\mbox{necessary labour}}$

which relates surplus-value to its source (in value terms and in time terms) and
is thus conceptually sound. Another formula is

$(II) \frac{\mbox{surplus labour}}{\mbox{working day}} = \frac{\mbox{surplus-value}}{\mbox{value of the product}} = \frac{\mbox{surplus product}}{\mbox{total product}}.$

This formula is not sound as it has no relation to how surplus-value is actually
produced. Instead, it relates it to the total product and implies a sharing of
the proceeds of production among capital and labour.

The formula

$(III) \frac{\mbox{unpaid labour}}{\mbox{paid labour}}$

is a synonym for the first formula but invites the confusion that labour and not
labour-power is bought.

## Part Six: Wages ##

### Chapter 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respectively the Price) of Labour-Power into Wages&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-19-detailed-commentary) ###

The wage form expresses the value of labour-power as a *price of labour*. This
expression is irrational as labour has no value and it is labour-power which is
bought.

However, it is not a mere false idea. Since the production of surplus-value is
the purpose of the capitalist production process, the worker's labour-power is
bought in order to put her to work long enough to realise a surplus-value:
$m$. The wage is the form in which the purchase of labour power and the purpose
of this purchase are consolidated. A capitalist buys labour-power to make it
work for a certain amount of time. The form of payment expresses the truth that
necessary labour is conditioned on surplus labour under the rule of capital, not
the other way around.

Time and intensity are the two determinations which characterise the magnitude
of value produced by labour. Each wage form is a reflection on these
determinants.

### Chapter 20: Time-Wages&nbsp;[*(+)*](chapter-20-commentary) ###

The price of labour for an hour is calculated as

$\mbox{price of 1 hour} = \frac{\mbox{working day}}{\mbox{value of labour-power}}.$

But this is not merely an arithmetic operation. The production of surplus-value
necessitates that a worker produces longer than needed to reproduce her
labour-power. *Time-wages* implement this interest of capital in the worker. A
worker is only paid the full value of labour-power if she produced not only the
value equivalent of her labour-power but also surplus-value.

Now if capital employs a worker for less than a full day (*short-time work*), a
worker is not able to reproduce herself, as she is not paid the value of her
labour-power. It is irrelevant here if she worked more or less than necessary
labour-time, as payment is attached to the full working day which includes both
necessary and surplus labour-time.

Capital pays extra for *overtime* to compensate for the additional devastation
of such long hours. A low hourly wage creates the interest with workers for
overtime, so the same workers supply more labour, capital can hence suppress the
price of labour per hour further.

### Chapter 21: Piece-Wages ###

The price of labour per piece produced is calculated as:

$\mbox{price per piece} = \frac{\mbox{price per hour}}{\mbox{pieces per hour}}.$

Again, this is not merely an arithmetic operation. With *piece wages* the
interest of capital in high intensity of labour is implanted in the worker: work
fast and concentrated to earn more. As workers therewith increase intensity,
they provide capital with the means to lower the piece wage: the new level of
intensity becomes the norm and workers still only get paid the value of their
labour-power.

This wage form does away with many otherwise necessary forms of supervision, but
it necessitates *quality control*, where workers are only paid for products of
sufficient quality.

### Chapter 22: National Differences in Wages ###

Real wage levels may vary from country to country. What is considered a normal
level of reproduction on one country may be considered beyond this level in
another. The production of the means of subsistence might be cheaper in one
country than another (agriculture and its reliance on climate, quality of the
soil, etc.).

Yet, the production of surplus-value does not rely on absolute wage levels,
though, but on the rate of surplus-value. This rate might be lower in a country
with a low wage level and vice versa. Capital does not need low wages, it needs
a high rate of surplus-value.

## Part Seven: The Process of Accumulation of Capital ##

### Chapter 23: Simple Reproduction ###

### Chapter 24: The Transformation of Surplus-Value into Capital ###

#### Capitalist Production on a Progressively Increasing Scale. The Inversion which Converts the Property Laws of Commodity Production into Laws of Capitalist Appropriation ####

#### The Political Economists’ Erroneous Conception of Reproduction on an Increasing Scale ####

#### Division of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue. The Abstinence Theory ####

#### The Circumstances which, Independently of the Proportional Division of Surplus-Value into Capital and Revenue, Determine the Extent of Accumulation, namely, the Degree of Exploitation of Labour-Power, the Productivity of Labour, the Growing Difference in Amount between Capital Employed and Capital Consumed, and the Magnitude of the Capital Advanced ####

#### The So-Called Labour Fund ####

### Chapter 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation ###

#### A Growing Demand for Labour-Power Accompanies Accumulation if the Composition of Capital Remains the Same ####

#### A Relative Diminution of the Variable Part of Capital Occurs in the Course of the Further Progress of Accumulation and of the Concentration Accompanying it ####

#### The Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus Population or Industrial Reserve Army ####

#### Different Forms of Existence of the Relative Surplus Population. The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation ####

#### Illustrations of the General Law of Capitalist Accumulation ####

## Part Eight: So-Called Primitive Accumulation ##

### Chapter 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation ###

### Chapter 27: The Expropriation of the Agricultural Population from the Land ###

### Chapter 28: Bloody Legislation against the Expropriated since the End of the Fifteenth Century. The Forcing Down of Wages by Act of Parliament ###

### Chapter 29: The Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer ###

### Chapter 30: Impact of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. The Creation of a Home Market for Industrial Capital ###

### Chapter 31: The Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist ###

### Chapter 32: The Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation ###

### Chapter 33: The Modern Theory of Colonization ###

