---
title: Volume 2 — The Process of Circulation of Capital
layout: page
---

## Part One: [The Metamorphoses of Capital and their Circuit](chapter-01-04-reading-aid) ##

### Chapter 1: The Circuit of Money Capital ###

#### 1. First Stage. M-C ####

#### 2. Second Stage. The Function of Productive Capital ####

#### 3. Third Stage. C'-M' ####

#### 4. The Circuit as a Whole ####

### Chapter 2: The Circuit of Productive Capital ###

#### 1. Simple Reproduction ####

#### 2. Accumulation and Reproduction on an Expanded Scale ####

#### 3. Accumulation of Money ####

#### 4. The Reserve Fund ####

### Chapter 3: The Circuit of Commodity Capital ###

### Chapter 4: The Three Figures of the Circuit ###

#### (Natural Economy, Money Economy and Credit Economy) ####

#### (The Matching of Demand and Supply) ####

### Chapter 5: Circulation Time ###

### Chapter 6: The Costs of Circulation ###

#### 1. Pure Circulation Costs ####

##### (a) Buying and Selling Time #####

##### (b) Book-keeping #####

##### (c) Money #####

#### 2. Costs o f Storage ####

##### (a) Stock Formation in General #####

##### (b) The Commodity Stock Proper #####

#### 3. Transport Costs ####

## Part Two: The Turnover of Capital ##

The following terms are defined below. They are collected here as a quick
reference:

 * *turnover time* also called: turnover period = production time + circulation
   time (Chapter 7)
 * *circulation time*: selling time + time of purchase (Chapter 14)
 * *cycle of turnovers*: number of turnovers needed for all capital components
   to be reproduced (Chapter 9)
 * *overall turnover*: average of turnovers of all capital parts (Chapter 9)

### Chapter 7: Turnover Time and Number of Turnovers ###

Capital must pass through production time and circulation time. To realise the
purpose of perpetual valorisation the advance must return in order to go through
the circuit again.

Whilst parts of capital are in different phases of the circuit the identity of
capital is expressed ideally in money of account. *Turnover* expresses the
periodical return of capital to its point of departure.

> 236:4 For the capitalist, the turnover time of his capital is the time for
> which he has to advance his capital in order for this to be valorized and for
> him to receive it back in its original shape.

The emphasis here is on "in its original shape", i.e. the time it takes capital
in money form (resp. in form of productive capital, commodity capital is not a
form of advanced capital) to return to money form.

*Turnover time* measures the time of such a period, it is the sum of production
time and circulation time. The *number of turnovers* compares the turnover of
various capitals, where — conventionally, due to agriculture — the turnover time
of each individual capital is related to a year.

Turnover is a new determination of efficiency. The faster the turnover the
faster capital returns to its original shape with a surplus, i.e. the faster it
valorised. While in Chapter 5 the standpoint was that circulation time is a
limit for production time, the new standpoint is that turnover time overall
ought to be shortened.

### Chapter 8: Fixed Capital and Circulating Capital ###

#### 1. The Formal Distinctions ####

#### 2. Components, Replacement, Repairs and Accumulation of the Fixed Capital ####

### Chapter 9: The Overall Turnover of the Capital Advanced. Turnover Cycles ###

Fixed and fluid (=circulation) capital parts of productive capital turn over
differently.  Furthermore, different parts of fixed capital have different
turnover times.

1. Capital is one sum of value that continously produces its own surplus.
   However, in its material form (as means of production) this identity is not
   expressed. To express this identity the average turnover time of its
   components is taken to express the *overall turnover* of capital.

   > 262:2 The overall turnover of the capital advanced is the average turnover
   > of its different component parts.

2. However, there are not only differences in turnover time but also in how the
   various parts turnover.  Circulating capital parts have to be replaced
   continously. Some parts of fixed capital can be replaced or repaired at
   shorter intervals.  Other parts of fixed capital can only be replaced once
   they have transferred all their value to the product. Those different forms
   of replacement do affect material reproduction but they do not affect the
   reproduction time of the values involved.

   > 262:5 It is necessary therefore to reduce the separate turnovers of the
   > various parts of the fixed capital to a similar form of turnover, so that
   > these differ only quantitatively, in the duration of their turnover.

3. The total value that turns over during a year might be larger than the total
   value advanced, even if a large part is advanced in fixed capital which takes
   many years to turn over. A capital splits into £80 fixed capital which takes
   10 years to turn over, and £20 which turn over 5 times a year. After a year
   5·£20 + £8 turned over which is more than the initially advanced £100.

4. The *value turnover* of capital — the time it takes for the intially advanced
   sum to turn over once — is separate from the actual reproduction time of
   capitals components.

   A capital that turns over 5 times a year has a value turnover of 5 times its
   original size in a year, but it is still the same capital. Its size is not
   affected by turnover time (ignoring surplus-value for now). But the continous
   return of circulating capital into its originally advanced form — money —
   allows capital to continously produce value and surplus-value even though its
   material components are not yet reproduced.

   If fixed capital needs 10 years to be reproduced then the production process
   must continue — the advanced capital has to decribe a *cycle of turnovers* —
   until the fixed capital components are reproduced/turned over. Only after 10
   years, in this example, all components of capital turned over, i.e. in its
   originally advanced form.

   With the capitalist mode of production fixed capital grows relatively,
   overall turnover time increases.  On the other hand, does the development of
   the capitalist mode of production shorten overall turnover time due to moral
   deprecation. The result is an estimated (by Marx) overall turnover time of 10
   years.

   The separation of value turnover and actual reproduction of the components of
   capital is the material basis for the business cycle — stagnation, moderate
   activity, overexcitement, crisis. The possibility of crisis is due to the
   separation of sale and purchase (cf. Volume 1, Chapter 3). A successful
   purchase presupposes a previous successful sale ($C-M-C$) and here fluid and
   fixed capital differ: fluid capital permanently causes purchases and
   sales. Fixed capital is continously transferred and the resulting commodities
   sold, but it is only replaced in bigger intervals (retransfer into productive
   capital).

### Chapter 10: Theories of Fixed and Circulating Capital. The Physiocrats and Adam Smith ###

### Chapter 11: Theories of Fixed and Circulating Capital. Ricardo ###

### Chapter 12: The Working Period ###

### Chapter 13: Production Time ###

From the standpoint of turnover all phases of the circuit ought to be
shortened. The working period was discussed in the previous chapter, this
chapter deals with *production time*. This is the time during which the product
develops but no labour is expended. Examples are plants that need to grow, wine
that needs to ferment, etc. Capital attempts to shorten production time. This
usually entails additional expenditures in fixed capital which increases the
overall turnover. Furthermore, these attempts have their limit in natural
conditions, e.g. in agriculture. To produce a regularity of production and
circulation stock is maintained such that part of the products can be sold while
other products still come into being.

### Chapter 14: Circulation Time ###

*Circulation time* is split into selling time and time of purchase (and
 transaction time).

*Selling time* is the time it takes to sell a commodity. This time fluctuates,
 but there are circumstances which determine it beyond such fluctuations, such
 as distance to markets. Improvements in communication and transportation
 technology allow to decrease selling time. These tend to affect different
 capitals in different ways, so the ratios of their selling times might
 vary. These improved transportation and communication routes and hubs lead to
 concentration of people and capital in one place. Improved communication and
 transportation also implies production for the world market as these new
 improved means must be used.

Both with respect to buying and selling the moment of payment is crucial for
turnover time. This is a basis for the credit system. The seller wants money
when she sends her commodities off, the buyer wants to pay when the commodities
arrive. The time between the two can be bridged by credit.

In addition to selling time and time of purchase there is also *transaction time*,
i.e. the time it takes money to travel. For example, it takes to process a bank
transfer.

The *time of purchase* is the time in which capital is in money form and seeks
to transform itself into productive capital. Here too distance to markets and
delivery times determine circulation time. Another factor is that sometimes
commodities can only be bought on specific dates, which lengthens time of
purchase.

### Chapter 15: Effect of Circulation Time on the Magnitude of the Capital Advanced ###

#### 1. Working Period and Circulation Period Equal ####

#### 2. Working Period Longer than Circulation Period ####

#### 3. Working Period Shorter than Circulation Period ####

#### 4. Results ####

#### 5. Effect of Changes in Price ####

### Chapter 16: The Turnover of Variable Capital ###

#### 1 . The Annual Rate of Surplus-Value ####

#### 2. The Turnover of an Individual Variable Capital ####

#### 3 . The Turnover of Variable Capital Considered from the Social Point of View ####

### Chapter 17: [The Circulation of Surplus-Value](chapter-17-commentary) ###

Differences in turnover produce a difference in the annual rate of
surplus-value, although the absolute mass of surplus value remains the same.
This result is correct if surplus-value is not accumulated; if accumulation
takes place then the mass of surplus-value is dependend on the circulation of
surplus-value. The speed and success of circulation of surplus-value is hence a
limit for capital's accumulation.

Faster turnover means

1. less expenditure for means of subsistence of the capitalist.

2. already realised surplus-value can be used for additional outlays in fixed
   capital.  Part of the originally advanced capital can be capitalised
   surplus-value, if it is covered by already realised surplus-value.

3. reproduction on an extended scale by reinvesting surplus-value when
   incremental small improvements are possible.

However, there will always be period when money is hoarded in order for it to be
turned into money capital later. This hoard can be accumulated by either selling
to a money producer directly (overall money in society increases) or by
withdrawing money from circulation by selling without buying.

How do the two forms of capitalist reproduction — simple reproduction and
accumulation — affect the realisation of surplus-value?

### 1. Simple Reproduction ##

The amount of money necessary to realise the commodities in circulation is
determined by the laws of simple commodity production (Volume 1, Chapter
3). This result is not altered by the value composition of commodities,
i.e. that they contain surplus-value.

From the standpoint of a capitalist there appears to be a problem, though. She
constantly throws less money into circulation than she withdraws and asks:
"Where does the money come from to realise surplus-value?" The problem, however,
is not where does the money come from to circulate surplus-value, but in general
where does the money come from to circulate commodities.  In our case, it is the
capitalists themselves who provide this money when they — in addition to
advancing capital — spend money on means of subsistence and luxury items.

### 2. Accumulation and Expanded Reproduction ##

This general result is not affected if production is expanded in the first
instance.  The capitalist already owns the money now to be invested in
additional productive capital.  That money now circulates as money capital
instead of as revenue, i.e. it changes its form, but it already exists.

Furthermore, the value reproduced by expanded reproduction — additional variable
and constant capital — can be realised with the money initially advanced, it has
the same value.  However, the increased capital also produced an increases
surplus-value, where does the money come from to realise it?

To some extend increased velocity of circulation of circulation can replace
additional money, otherwise additonal money must be produced. This limits the
capitalist mode of production's accumulation to the growth of money production;
a limit which is overcome by the credit system.

Yet, in absence of such a credit system, most extended reproduction requires
hoarding until sufficient funds are available. Where does this hoarded money
come from? If the hoard is accumulated by selling to money producers directly,
there is no problem, additional money is produced and horded.

However, if the hoard is accumulated by withdrawing money from circulation, this
presupposes that not all capitalists engage in hoarding at the same time. The
condition of accumulation is hence that the turnovers of capital interlock in
such a way, that selling without buying is matched by buying with selling,
i.e. some capitalists must expand their production while others hoard.

The realisation of surplus-value of one capitalist is dependent on the
realisation of surplus-value of other capitalists, those have to realise her
surplus-value.  Already in Volume 1 was discussed that for accumulation every
capitalist is dependent on other capitalists having earned the money to buy
their commodities.  This concerns the mass of value (enough surplus-value) and
value form (money). An additional consideration here is turnover: those other
capitalists might have produced surplus-value but might have realised it.  When
they go on and start purchasing is another question. The interlock of turnovers
on a social scale hence determines the reproduction and accumulation of capital.

## Part Three: The Reproduction and Circulation of the Total Social Capital ##

### Chapter 18: Introduction ###

#### 1. The Object of the Inquiry ####

#### 2. The Role of Money Capital ####

### Chapter 19: Former Presentations of the Subject ###

#### 1. The Physiocrats ####

#### 2. Adam Smith ####

##### (a) Smith's General Perspectives #####

##### (b) Smith's Resolution of Exchange-Value into v+s #####

##### (c) The Constant Capital Component #####

##### (d) Capital and Revenue in Adam Smith #####

##### (e) Summary #####

#### 3. Later Writers ####

### Chapter 20: Simple Reproduction ###

#### 1. Formulation of the Problem ####

#### 2. The Two Departments of Social Production ####

#### 3. Exchange Between the Two Departments: I(v+c) against IIc ####

#### 4. Exchange Within Department II. Necessary Means of Subsistence and Luxury Items ####

#### 5. The Mediation of t he Exchanges by Monetary Circulation ####

#### 6. The Constant Capital in Department I ####

#### 7. Variable Capital and Surplus-Value in the Two Departments ####

#### 8. The Constant Capital in Both Departments ####

#### 9. A Look Back at Adam Smith, Storch and Ramsay ####

#### 10. Capital and Revenue: Variable Capital and Wages ####

#### 11. Replacement of the Fixed Capital ####

##### (a) Replacement of the Depreciation Component in the Money Form #####

##### (b) Replacement of the Fixed Capital in Kind #####

##### (c) Results #####

#### 12. The Reproduction of t he Money Material ####

#### 13. Destutt de Tracy's Theory of Reproduction ####

### Chapter 21: Accumulation and Reproduction on an Expanded Scale ###

#### 1. Accumulation in Department I ####

##### (a) Hoard Formation #####

##### (b) The Additional Constant Capital #####

##### (c) The Additional Variable Capital #####

#### 2. Accumulation in Department II ####

#### 3. Schematic Presentation of Accumulation ####

##### (a) First Example #####

##### (b) Second Example #####

##### (c) The Exchange of IIc in the Case of Accumulation #####

#### 4. Supplementary Remarks ####

